By now I've dealt with most of the big internet myths about climate change.
I've tracked down their sources and shown, by simple comparison,
that the sources have nearly always been misinterpreted.
Papers don't say what the myth-makers claim they say,
or important conclusions have been left out altogether.
Quotes have been misquoted or fabricated, and graphs have been altered.
The scale of the consequences of climate change have often been exaggerated,
and the time scales contracted.
But what about the internet myths for which there's no source?
They're just...
Well, let's start with the first one, and you can see for yourselves.
Why do we suppose that carbon dioxide is responsible for our changing climate?
CO2 forms only a very small part of the Earth's atmosphere.
Do you happen to know what percentage of the atmosphere is carbon dioxide?
This tiny little sliver is carbon dioxide.
It comprises only about one twenty-five hundredth of the atmosphere.
Only four percent of our greenhouse gas is carbon dioxide.
It's an incredibly small portion.
Carbon dioxide is only a tiny trace gas in the atmosphere.
CO2 now occupies, get this, one ten-thousandth more of the atmosphere than it did in 1750.
Now there's one thing all of these claims have in common.
Okay, they're all made by people who aren't climate researchers, but that's not it.
What they have in common is that none of them gives a conclusion
based on any kind of experiment or observation or measurement or calculation.
They simply feel that because CO2 makes up what Durkin calls a very small part of the atmosphere,
or as Tim Ball calls it, incredibly small, or tiny according to John Coleman,
that it must therefore only exert a tiny influence on climate.
In other words, they're basing their conclusions on just one thing.
They're relying on feeling.
Yes, to counter those elitist scientists and their observations and measurements we have
nothing more than feeling,
which is why Durkin's argument wasn't an experiment or a measurement or a calculation.
It was a question he never answered.
Why do we suppose that carbon dioxide is responsible for our changing climate?
It's a good question, and of course the answer can be found in thousands of scientific papers
that have been written on the subject over the last 120 years.
But for some reason Durkin didn't answer his own question.
He simply appealed to our gut instinct by giving us his feeling and Tim Ball's feeling
that if something's tiny, it would surely have a tiny effect.
Now I do agree that this feeling method of scientific inquiry is much easier.
It doesn't require any research or any difficult calculations,
or any knowledge of physics, or expensive lab equipment.
You don't need to spend years studying or reading the scientific literature,
or trying to understand those fancy graphs that only elitist scientists seem to understand.
All you need in order to come up with what's known in feeling world as a theory is the following.
An armchair?
Once you're sitting comfortably in the armchair, just wait till a thought bubble appears
and you've instantly got a theory.
See, none of that messy experimenting or years of data collecting
or complicated calculating is even necessary.
Now you can make your own graph based on what you feel is obvious, completely devoid of figures,
like this one from the International Journal of Feelings
that compares the amount of stuff with the effect of that stuff.
And instantly we see that heaps of stuff leads to a humongous effect,
while a tiny amount of stuff leads to a teeny weeny effect.
It's just common sense.
But of course for everyone who explains this very obvious feeling that CO2 is so teeny weeny
that it can't have any effect, there's some know-it-all who's going to contradict him.
In this case, it's Mr Monkton.
Carbon dioxide is a plant food, it's necessary.
Plant food.
Yeah. Without it, all plant life and therefore all life that depends on it would disappear.
While the Monkton who says CO2 is hugely important
argues it out with the Monkton who claims it's negligible,
let me take the side of Mr Monkton, by which I mean this one.
According to the Biology textbooks, he's absolutely right.
All plant life depends on CO2, and nearly all animal life depends on plant life.
Yet it's amazing that the same people who argue that this
small part, tiny little sliver, incredibly small fraction of a percent of the Earth's atmosphere
is too negligible to have any impact,
also accept that it's responsible for nearly all life on Earth.
0.054%. It's less than half of one percent.
Yeah.
Unbelievable, isn't it?
You would think that it's absolutely frantic.
No, no, no. This is like millions and millions and millions and millions of years.
This is not good science.
CO2 makes plants grow, and that is a good thing.
What this tells us, as we'll see throughout this video,
is that feelings not only override scientific observation and measurement,
they even override observations by the feelings themselves.
The natural world is full of examples of trace amounts having huge effects.
Ozone in the stratosphere makes up a smaller proportion of the atmosphere than CO2,
but without it we'd receive lethal doses of ultraviolet radiation.
It's a shame we can't actually see carbon dioxide blocking outgoing radiation,
because even people who don't understand the numbers and calculations
would have a very graphic idea of what's happening.
Here's Dan Miller demonstrating with ink what 280 parts per million looks like.
That's the same concentration as pre-industrial CO2.
And then 390 parts per million, the concentration today.
Small things can indeed have big effects.
So if there's one thing that separates the scientists from the junk science feely,
it's the battle of observation, measurement and calculation against feelings, belief and guesswork.
Here, for example, is Congressman John Shimkus explaining during a congressional hearing on climate change
why 120 years of physics must be wrong.
Genesis 8, verse 21 and 22.
Never again will I curse the ground because of man,
even though every inclination of his heart is evil from childhood,
and never again will I destroy all living creatures as I have done.
As long as the earth endures, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter,
day and night will never cease.
The earth will end only when God declares it's time to be over.
Man will not destroy this earth. This earth will not be destroyed by a flood.
Well, that's very good news. But what's that got to do with climate change?
God will never destroy the earth or all living creatures,
but there's nothing in the Bible that says God won't prevent the climate from changing
any more than he seems inclined to prevent earthquakes, melting glaciers and deforestation.
You know, God's still up there. We're now going through a cooling spell.
No, I'm not going to argue about whether God's up there or whether the Bible is infallible
because it makes absolutely no difference in this case.
There's nothing in the Bible that says the climate won't change
and no sign that God won't allow the climate to change.
And Shimkus's feeling that climate change implies the end of the world or a global flood
or the extinction of all life is just that, a feeling.
It's a feeling shared by a lot of environmental activists,
one of whom left a post on my channel insisting that the oceans were going to boil.
I'm going to examine the origin of this myth in a future video,
but of course nothing supports it in the scientific literature.
What strange bedfellows these feelies make.
I'd like to speak to you about global warming
and about what we all can do to make an impact to help protect our planet and save our planet.
Once again, there's nothing in the published research,
you know, where the results of experiments and measurements are shown,
that says climate change will destroy the Earth or flood the Earth or extinguish all life.
And finally, this.
To think that we could affect weather all that much is pretty arrogant.
It's really arrogant for mankind to think he controls the climate of the universe.
That's right.
Carbon dioxide can't have any effect on the climate because that would be arrogant.
Now that may sound like scientific twaddle,
but in the feely world it's cutting-edge, unassailable belief.
And they can prove it.
If we look at another feely graph of global phenomena against lack of humility,
we can see that doubling carbon dioxide levels is much higher up the scale
than the idea that we're polluting the oceans, which is merely self-inflated,
or the assumption that we're destroying tropical rainforests, which achieves the level of haughty.
The more humble the feeling, the more likely it is that a phenomenon is occurring.
By the way, Charlton Heston seems to think that changing the climate
should be at the very top of the scale, intoxicating vanity.
You think man can destroy the planet.
What intoxicating vanity.
But like Kucinich and Shimkus, he's obviously confused climate change with destruction of the planet.
Sorry Chuck, but just look back in geological history
and you'll see that altering the climate doesn't make the Earth blow up.
Even Shimkus can confirm that.
Today we have about 388 parts per million in the atmosphere.
I think in the age of the dinosaurs where we had most flora and fauna,
we were probably at 4,000 parts per million.
OK, apart from the fact that it was more like 1,000 parts per million,
and apart from the rather dubious claim that there was more flora and fauna during the dinosaur era
than at any other time,
Shimkus is at least right about there being a lot more CO2 back then,
about three times as much as today.
And consequently, it was much hotter.
And consequently, there was no ice at the poles.
And consequently, the sea level was about 500 metres higher than today.
Not sure how that helps your case, John.
The predominance of feelings to explain the world around us is nothing new.
In the Middle Ages, doctors felt that bleeding a patient would get rid of sickness.
Medieval scholars felt that there must be some mysterious substance inside combustible material
that caused them to burst into flames.
It was obvious.
And of course it was just common sense that boats made out of metal wouldn't float,
heavy objects fell faster than light ones, and the Sun orbited the Earth.
But in the 17th century, observation and inference quickly established themselves
as the best way to understand the world around us.
People began to do experiments and measure things and make calculations.
Today, no scientist would be taken seriously if he just sat in an armchair dreaming up ideas,
guessing at how he felt the world worked.
But in the Internet age, where everyone gets to comment and everyone has an opinion,
that's how people seem to think science works.
The theory of evolution, plate tectonic theory, and heliocentric theory,
well, they're all just theories, opinions.
And in this democratic age, one person's opinion is as good as another.
Or as someone commented on one of my climate change videos,
there are no facts in observable science, just data and interpretation.
So you've got the evolutionist worldview and the creationist worldview.
Yeah, you've got evolution and creation, two basic worldviews.
You know what the fight is about?
How you interpret the facts, and how you interpret the facts depends upon what?
The beliefs that you have to start with.
Well, it's true for me. You see, I believe...
You mean true for you is different from true for anybody else.
Yeah, absolutely.
I've got very good at anticipating the kind of posts I'll get in response from critics of my videos,
so let me save you the trouble of writing by giving my reply.
It's easy to attack weak arguments like these.
Why don't you address the real problems with climate change,
like the fact that the Himalayan glaciers aren't melting?
Or, to put it in the way it's usually phrased, you stupid pompous dickhead.
Firstly, of course I have addressed these issues.
I've made over 20 videos debunking most of the big myths about climate change, so check them out.
Secondly, these myths are quite easy to debunk
because they nearly all claim to be based on real graphs and papers that can be checked.
A simple comparison shows how their sources have been misinterpreted, misquoted or manipulated.
It's the feelings that are much harder to debunk
because they're not based on anything but thought bubbles.
First of all, they started with global warming because they wanted to focus on CO2.
And then when they realised that the global temperature was going down since 2000,
even though CO2 continued to rise, they moved to goalposts.
And this is one of the things that's a giveaway.
And they started talking about climate change.
Now of course you and I know that the term climate change has been around since at least the Kyoto Protocol of 1997,
and at least since the 1980s when the IPCC was formed,
and at least since the 1970s and the 1960s and the 1950s,
when papers were being written about the link between CO2 and climate change.
So we know the term climate change was used before, during and after the term global warming was coined
to describe one particular aspect of climate change.
Yes, we know that. But remember in the feely world, feelings override observation.
If Timbal was able to show a source for his claim, then that would be easy.
We could just check the source and show him he's wrong.
But if he feels something so strongly that the existence of these papers is impossible,
then how will you ever convince him otherwise?
Instead of name calling, you should blah blah blah blah blah whatever.
I think I've been very polite in my climate change series.
If you don't like the word feely, then by all means suggest another word
to describe someone who derives a conclusion from feelings rather than facts and figures.
I just found that description a bit wordy to keep repeating, so feely is easier.
And if the feelys can suggest a better name for themselves,
at the same time please explain why you think feelings and beliefs should override observation and measurement.
Should be interesting.
Evolution, climate change, is also just a feeling, a belief, a hoax.
Well if you were thinking of posting this, take a look at the video again.
There's a difference between feeling and guessing and observing and measuring.
Every observation can be measured and every measurement is an observation.
Perhaps we're just not doing a very good job of teaching science in schools,
at least a basic understanding of scientific terms like facts, hypotheses and theories,
and an ability to think rather than feel.
Can I get you guys to sign a petition?
What for?
For banning dihydrogen monoxide.
Oh yeah, I'll sign that.
Thank you very much.
And our petition woman was getting signatures left and right.
Okay, mostly left. But ma'am, there's a lot of people against that evil water.
It's everywhere and we just really need to ban it.
Two more supporters.
These passionate, informed people didn't even need to ask what dihydrogen monoxide is.
They didn't even ask.
Perhaps the answer is to give all of those who think they're being conned by scientists the opportunity to separate,
to govern themselves in a world where an understanding of nature is ruled by feelings rather than science.
They could return to the Middle Ages when things were true if they were obvious or common sense,
to a time of wooden boats and bloodletting.
No vaccines in Philandia. Children would be free to develop all those diseases the rest of us will be immunised against.
Answers in school exams would always be marked correct as long as a student felt that the answer was true.
Physics classes could be replaced with finger painting. Churches could take the place of hospitals.
Government policy would be run by astrologers.
It would be an interesting mix because we'd have people like John Shimkus and Bill O'Reilly
sharing their feelings with people like Denis Kucinich and New Age environmentalists.
And this would be their national anthem.